Not just how they felt about the training.
Awesome teacher, love the stuff, go away, nothing changes.
So we're looking really hard at how to get a better impact for this, which would be
good for funders, providers, and learners.
That tool's rolling out now. Fourth,
the review of the Retirement Villages Act has proceeded
well. Legislative drafting has commenced with a bill intended to be
introduced mid-year. This is the culmination of work we've led
since 2020, working with Housing and Urban Development
to rebalance consumer rights with operator rights.
And fifth, KiwiSaver, recommendation to action.
One of the highlights of the year was the government adoption of our recommendation
to lift KiwiSaver default contributions from 3% to 4%
and to extend employer and government contributions to 16- and
17-year-olds.
We calculated that KiwiSaver will now last
30% longer for median earners, which is a
transformational outcome for many future retirees.
Within two days of the announcement, there was a 2,500%
increase in active users of the sorted KiwiSaver calculator,
which tells you something about the appetite for trusted, independent
information.
So you can see the breadth of our impact of our work across government
and the sector with a very small team.
But the message I most want to leave with you finally is that
a holistic long-term view of the retirement income system is
essential.
Tinkering with settings simply weakens the structure of the system.
The latest is allowing access to KiwiSaver for farm ownership.
A farm is a business. This is poor policy and weakens the
fundamental purpose of KiwiSaver being a retirement scheme,
not a general savings or business scheme.
KiwiSaver is, of course, voluntary.
Another tinker earlier allowed total remuneration,
where the employee is actually paying both their contribution
and the employer's. This was not in the original KiwiSaver scheme,
was permitted by a law change by a National government in
2008.
No subsequent government has repealed it.
It means people have less take-home pay, and employers are
not doing their bit.
Short-term thinking with the retirement income system is a real threat
to the wellbeing of future older New Zealanders.
That's you.
We delivered our substantial 2025 review of
retirement income policies in December.
Its main message is that system change will happen,
and a cross-party approach is the best way to develop a
principled 10-year plan to consider strategic
change for both KiwiSaver and super together.
Both are essential mechanisms that work together.
So I leave you with this thought. This committee,
itself a cross-party mechanism,
has an opportunity to support that key recommendation
to promote a measured cross-party approach to considering
long-term system change.
This committee could review the mechanism suggested by the commission in our
report and doubtless improve it.
We know collaboration is possible.
The system will fail New Zealanders if we can't find new ways to think
long term, as New Zealand grapples with increasingly complex
issues.
Sure.
Thank you so
much. First question from Dr. Lawrence Yun.
Thank you, Chair, and I just want to first say thank you so much for all of your
work, Jane, and I particularly appreciate your briefing on aging population and
the fallacy in social services and communities as well.
My first question
is focused on one part of that, which is retirement village.
Now we know we have seen the Cabinet paper when it comes to retirement village, and
you mentioned in your report that you were involved in that.
In terms of the actual Cabinet paper that we've seen and what you've
heard from retirement village residents, do
you think that the recommendation and the perspective has been
reflected in that Cabinet paper?
The proposed legislation moves a long
way ahead from where we were in 2020.
Some of the changes have already been implemented by the operators, which is
amazing. Some of the changes
yet to be implemented are still good, and there are still a few areas that
will continue to be the subject of debate, which will be a very good and
interesting select committee time.
As part of that review, supplementary, Chair,
what do you think would be the impact for
retirees if retirement village doesn't look into
capital sharing?
That's probably the remaining nub of the issues, right?
And the real question then is
when repayment might happen,
and
how much repayment happens from the original capital sum, right?
So those are really crunchy business debates,
and resident issues,
and I think probably further modeling needs to be done on this.
But
no matter what happens, the bill itself is a major advance on where we
are at the moment, which is dealing with 20-year-old legislation that's well out of
date.
Just signaling to you-
Yep
... Chair, I have a new question on income that I'll ask you later.
All right. We'll come back to you later then.
Yeah. Thank you.
We have a supplementary from Ingrid Leary.
Yeah. Thank you for the work that you've done on this with HUD,
and noting that it appears that the
capital repayments will be mandated to a year, which in my view and in my member's
bill is not enough. Mine is three months.
Mm-hmm.
Lawrence Yun and I did ask for an exposure draft of the bill and haven't received
it. But I'm wondering, do you accept that
exclusion of existing contractsWill
actually disadvantage those who are already in
retirement villages, because they'll be the last cab off the rank to have the
incentivization for their licenses to occupy to be sold by
operators, particularly in an environment where we've got fast-track building
consent happening and expansion of villages.
And if so, what actions would you like to see the government take around,
rather than excluding retrospectivity, what further action could
they take to fathom out a way that is fair to all
retirement village residents, so that we avoid a situation where those on
current contracts will actually be disadvantaged by the new law?
Yeah. Again, I think this is the last crunchy hurdle
to be jumped. You've got a long-standing legal
principle that says legislative changes aren't
retrospective,
uh, in most cases.
You've got a good argument from the current residents going, "Yes, I know,
but..."
Mm-hmm.
And I think what will need to happen is some really good legal research
on precedence. If there is a precedent for retrospectivity, what does it look
like? Is it as strong as this one? I don't know.
I don't know whether that work's been done by HAD yet, but I can see that it's
going to have to be to help resolve this issue.
Just one more sup if I may. Yeah. And acknowledging that we had the Residential
Tenancies Act, which could be considered an analog.
We've had changes made during COVID to commercial tenancies,
which were retrospective in application, and we've recently had
statements in the house by Honorable Brockman Belden that question the nature
of
particular provisions of contracts saying that if they are just provisions, they
may not be retrospective. So, in all of that context, absolutely
endorse what you've just said about further legal work.
That's right. Again, every example that could be
found for an equivalent approach would be helpful to that argument.
Thank you.
A supplementary from Dr. David Woods.
Yeah, supplementary on this. We're talking about capital share, and we're talking
about timing really, aren't we?
Mm-hmm.
Has there been any international comparative analysis of
where our sector sits as proposed to others-
Mm
... or opposed?
The international comparators are not that
simple actually. Ours is quite different from others, which is no great surprise to
anything in New Zealand, really. I've forgotten what the
Australian situation is. Do you remember? I can't.
Section eight.
Yeah. I
think it is, but it varies at state and federal.
That's right.
But again, it's very different. Coverage of license to occupies is quite different.
Yeah. So, my instinctive response is always to find
to bring that home, but we couldn't, which is why we had to go
process to identify what the problem was here.
Right.
All right. New question from Dr. Vanessa Lindsay.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you very much for all the contribution that
you've made during your time as commissioner.
It's been
wonderful to watch and see from this committee how
it's progressing. Previously, you've had reports
around retirement age and
basically recommended that the retirement age not
be adjusted or lifted.
One of the things that we have to struggle with as a country is how
we pay for
our superannuation scheme going forward.
Mm.
If that's not the solution, what, in your
view, could be a solution for the sustainability and
affordability of our
superannuation scheme going forward?
That's a really good question, and it is one of the core questions around the
system itself.
Yeah.
Which is why we say
tinkering or one-step solutions are not the way to deal with this.
Right?
If we can get
commitment to developing a long-term plan,
then at that stage, all those competing tensions can be evaluated
cross-portfolio, cross-party, and go where will we want to land as a
country?
It really needs to focus at a high level on vision.
What kind of country do we want for older New Zealanders?
And then work down from that.
Affordability is absolutely a question.
The answer is, are there other elements of government spending that could stop to
help make it affordable? Always a good question.
There are other mechanisms and system settings that could be looked at
as well. For instance, means testing between 65 and 70,
something like that.
Mm-hmm.
But none of these things should be considered in isolation without having a bit of
an overall game plan. If we want to change things, then can we
do it in a meaningful and holistic way that gets the best set
of results for what is a series of quite complicated problems?
Just a supplementary on that.
What work have you done so far in that area?
Or is there any recommendation for further research
or
public engagement that you would make?
The recommendation is
to develop a plan. It's a very large document, and it's excellent
bedtime reading.
Yeah.
All right. A supplementary from Ann Williams.
Yeah. Thank you,
Commissioner. I'm really concerned about a particular cohort of New
Zealanders who don't fall into the traditional thing we've relied on around home
ownership and KiwiSaver funds. And when I look
at our current superannuation, it feels to me like an efficient
universal basic income at an end of life where targeting would be
inefficient. What is your concern for that cohort who are
now couch surfing or even homeless if we were to
continue with incremental change or just changing settings
rather than comprehensive reform?
It's again, another good question.
This is almost a forgotten cohort, which is why we keep
saying we cannot do individual system change in isolation.
So if you are of the view, for instance, that if you just put the NZ Super age up,
end of problem, job done, that's the narrowest of narrow
views, and does not take into account the
impacts on a series of
different types of people. Those impacts need to be analyzed
carefully. All right? So those people
that you're talking about now, we are predicting that this is going to rise
considerably. We're predicting a 100% increase in renters
by 2048.And NZ Super is
designed for not incurring considerable housing
costs. It's designed for being mortgage-free or being in
well-subsidized council or state housing.
Those models themselves are under enormous pressure, as you know.
So my plea is that-
Chair
... every time we get questions like this, we go, "It's part of the great bucket of
problems in this space," and we can't ignore the big ones.
That's one.
All right. Supplementary from Lawrence Yuen.
Thank you. And this
also overtakes my primary question.
I don't have-
Later. Yeah.
Yeah.
We have more time.
This is... No, no, no. I
don't have a primary anymore.
Oh, good.
This is the supplementary.
So on that,
two supplementary. First one is, what modeling has been done
on those who are over 65 who are purely looking
at pension plus maybe accommodation supplement, who are still
renting at a market rate, not in public housing.
Do we have any modeling on what proportion of their Super or pension
is being used towards rent?
That's one for my colleague in the policy and research team.
It's not something we have directly modeled,
but we do know that about 40% of people on New Zealand Super
just rely on New Zealand Super and pretty much that and nothing else.
And we see that that group of people particularly who are renting as being
over-represented in the poverty statistics-
Yeah
... of the over 65s. And I think what's striking is we actually have seen quite a
remarkable increase in poverty in the over 65 groups.
It used to be almost practically zero, but now it's actually slightly higher
than the working age population. So we are seeing emerging concerns there.
We haven't specifically measured the degree to which people are having to
spend their New Zealand Super on rent though.
Yeah. And second question is, one of the things we heard recently from, for
example, Housing First Ko Tūtahi, is the fact that over
65-year-olds has had the most drastic increase, a 300% increase
on the social housing register, and they're waiting for that.
While you're saying there's a long-term
non-partisan solution we should all be looking at, what would be a
recommendation for immediate solution?
There's no immediate solutions for housing.
That is one of the things I've learnt in this job.
But one of the things I wanted to do during my tenure is to
ensure that in the housing debate, which was all about the
problems of first-time buyers when I started, and true it was a
problem, the housing debate needs to think more broadly and
absolutely consider what older New Zealanders need because the
stereotype of us all sitting in nice, comfortable-
Mm-hmm
... little middle-class houses fully paid off-
... is indeed that, a stereotype.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Hamish Gabriel.
Yes. Thank you. Just following up on that.
With your modeling,
over the last couple of quarters, we've seen the highest level of first-home buyers
as a percentage of real estate sales, I think 29%.
Has that been taken into consideration when you're modeling future
demand for housing in 65 plus? Because it's something which has kind
of flown under the radar.
The first home buyers ebb and flow depending on market conditions,
right? And so when the
interest rates dropped and the housing prices dropped, it became
more attractive. But yes, they're considered within an overall picture,
are they not?
Yeah, they're quite different segments-
Mm
... of the housing market. And one thing where we have done research
was to interview quite a number of landlords
just to try and understand what the private rental market looks like for over 65s,
and there was basically very low awareness of
the aging of the population and the fact that
the ability to provide good rental properties is going to
require some sort of changes to layouts of bathrooms and those sorts of
questions. So the private market's not really
delivering a rental stock that's suitable for the over
65 population, so that's probably where we have the larger concern rather
than worrying about sort of implications with the sort of first-
Supplementary. Yes
... first home buyers.
All right. I'll go to Ruben Davidson.
You have only one, you've been waiting for a while.
I do.
Yeah.
And I just want to acknowledge your role as commissioner and
caution anyone who uses the words retirement and Jane Grayson in the same sentence
again.
But my question is
around KiwiSaver.
Mm.
I'm seeing anecdotally through my office, electorate office,
but also through conversations with JPs in the area, record
numbers of people accessing KiwiSaver funds-
Yeah
... early.
You spoke about the-
Mm
... shifts in default and the potential for KiwiSaver to last
30% longer. My question is really around
what data that's relying on and at what point in time,
based on the huge surge we're seeing in
people accessing KiwiSaver funds earlier.
Yeah. The overall percentage of people that
make hardship withdrawals is about 1.5% of-
Yeah. 1.5. Yeah
... the entire KiwiSaver population.
It's absolutely true it's rising at the moment because of the cost of living
crisis, no question. You've got two competing tensions here, right?
If people really need the money and they're on the breadline, then it's best they
take some. Just best that they do.
The question is whether they're getting sufficient advice-
Yes
... at the grassroots, sufficient budget and mentoring assistance,
whether their provider is establishing that their grounds are real,
and whether they can then get back on the KiwiSaver horse the moment their
financial situation improves.
Mm-hmm.
So I don't have a problem with the ability to withdraw per se.
What we don't know is the real reasons for withdrawal, and that's a
piece of work that my office will be doing over the next little while, because
there is lots and lots of anecdotal evidence.
If it's all purely hardship, good.
There's a little stream of thought that says people still think it's a savings
account, and they should be able to get their money whenever the time they feel
like it.
Yeah.
And that's a concern if that is true.
And then there's lots of stories about weight loss surgery and all the rest of it.
We just don't know any of this.
Mm.
And so the best thing my office can do, I think, is get the data-
Yeah
... because policy and evidence in this space-
Important thing.
Mm-hmm.
Do you
sense of how long
when that picture can be more accurately
on?
Well, I know that Public Trust, for example, are doing a lot of good work in
this space, and so we're talking with them. So, how long will it take?
It is hard to provide specific timeline, but it is
actively being worked on right as we speak, so.
Yeah. I had a direct conversation with Public Trust a couple of months ago because
they're introducing, as it turns out, a whole new
platform, which is going to be able to give them much more data than has ever been
properly seen before. And they're one of the largest
supervisors in the country, so they will be a really good litmus test, I
think, of what they can see in terms of their
provider and customer stats.
And from there we can
extrapolate it out. I'd like to think there'd be some data available next year,
at least preliminary.
Yeah.
Supplementary.
Thank you. Just going to the issue of how the
market is going to accommodate high levels of disability.
Wondering what analysis you've done on the best policy instruments.
My intuition would suggest incentivizing,
but have you done a return on investment around what
incentivizing, say through tax breaks or other things would do
to that market?
And the second one is,
I'll start with that one first. Thank you.
The short answer is no.
No.
We're a very small commission, so we have to be really tightly focused, as I said
at the beginning. So there are so many issues in this space to be thinking about,
right?
Sure. So,
we set out our priorities every year in our statement of
performance expectations. Mm.
And really happy to receive feedback over time about whether there's a particular
area that you think is serious and within
our scope and under-researched. We think we've got most of
them, but-
Could potentially be something that HUD could be looking at.
Yeah.
Secondly, just around that,
gosh,
do you have a view on with new social or public or
community housing, given all of these issues,
whether we should be adopting a particular higher standard of
disabled access rather than the current standards?
It would be logical, but we don't have a formal view.
This is Whaikaha space, not really ours.
Sure.
Yeah.
All right. Lawrence Yuen.
Thank you. Quick supplementary, but may not be a quick response.
Last year in the briefing you identified in terms of
KiwiSaver, and it came as a surprise to the committee that women and
self-employed are some of the most affected and not acknowledged when it comes to
have substantial KiwiSaver savings, and women in particular are most at risk of
shock events. You identified a problem last year, but what's the solution?
The solution is being very aware of the gender disparities in policy.
The root of this is the gender pay gap, which means
that employers and legislators can have a view on this.
The solution can lie with the individual and the individual's
whanau. If we can consciousness-raise enough so that
women, for a start, understand it's an issue, which I didn't particularly, I have
to say, when I started, and then can have conversations with
their whanau about what might happen if they go on parental leave,
what might happen if they're doing other caregiving,
what might happen if they're out of the workforce for other kinds of reasons.
And more specifically, the men in their lives,
their husbands and whanau,
and
partners. If they can understand that this actually is real, then
if they're good men in their lives, they will want to try and do something
themselves too.
Mm-hmm.
Can I just also add in the review, this is something we
did quite a lot of work on and on parental leave, we did make
recommendations around,
because currently if you go on parental leave, the government does step in as
your employer, but take-up of that program is very low. It's about 20%.
So we did make some recommendations around strengthening that, and we've done a lot
of work with Henry, the company,
and we're continuing to work with them on sort of trying to understand the
self-employed and what can be done.
Mm.
But it's all in the review.
Marvelous.
Good. It looks like there are no more questions now.
So thank you so much, Jen, for your service. Best wishes.
Heaps of best wishes from the entire committee to you.
Are there any final remarks that you would like to make?
No. It's been a pleasure, as always, to come and talk with you about our work.
My whole team is very passionate about what we do because we are working for the
greater good of New Zealanders, which is always very satisfying.
But I would end by reiterating my comments that
you are a classic cross-party mechanism.
There are ways I think that committees can help drive a
conversation that gets out of the silos and
into what's better for long-term thinking.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
We appreciate you. Thank you. Yeah.